Qlue ls (#2)
IoannisNezis/ad-blog: content/post/project-qlue-ls/index.md

---
title: "Qlue-ls a SPARQL language server"
date: 2025-01-12T12:43:04+02:00
author: "Ioannis Nezis"
authorAvatar: "img/profile.png"
tags: ["SPARQL", "lsp", "wasm", "rust"]
categories: []
image: "img/cover.png"
---

> Modern developer environments are way more capable than simple Text editors.

Author: ```suggestion
Modern developer environments are way more capable than simple text editors.
```

> Modern developer environments are way more capable than simple Text editors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modern developer environments are way more capable than simple text editors.
```

They provide domain-specific tools to improve the user experience.

> They give hints, suggest changes or completions and more.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They give hints, suggest changes and completions and more.  
```
klingt komisch

> In this article we will take a look behind the curtains and build language support for *SPARQL*,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we will take a look behind the curtains and build language support for *SPARQL*,
```

a query language for knowledge graphs.

<!--more-->

You can find the source code in my [GitHub repository](https://github.com/IoannisNezis/sparql-language-server).  

> And a life demo on [qlue-ls.com](https://qlue-ls.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And a live demo on [qlue-ls.com](https://qlue-ls.com/).
```
Live-Demonstration, nicht Lebensdemonstration

# TL;DR

> I build a [sparql-language-server](https://github.com/IoannisNezis/Qlue-ls) from scratch in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), powered by [tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I built a [sparql-language-server](https://github.com/IoannisNezis/Qlue-ls) from scratch in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), powered by [tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/).
```
SIMPLE PAST PLS sonst meinst du, dass das Ding gerade erst am bauen ist.

> To showcase the language server I build a [web editor](https://sparql.nezis.de/) using [Monaco](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To showcase the language server I built a [web editor](https://sparql.nezis.de/) using [Monaco](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/).
```
s.o. SIMPLE PAST

To run the language server within the browser, I used [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/)

# Content

- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Goal](#goal)
- [The Language Server Protocol ](#the-language-server-protocol)
    - [JSON-RPC](#json-rpc)

>     - [Document synchronization](#document-synchronization)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Document Synchronization](#document-synchronization)
```
Überschriften groß. Häufiger Fehler, also = "*"

    - [Capabilities](#capabilities)
- [Implementation](#implementation)
    - [speakingJSON-RPC](#speaking-json-rpc)

>     - [Parser: the Engine under the hood](#parser:-the-engine-under-the-hood)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Parser: the Engine under the Hood](#parser:-the-engine-under-the-hood)
```
*

        - [Tree-sitter](#tree-sitter)

>     - [Implemented Capabilities](#implemented-capabilities)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Implemented Capabilities](#implemented-capabilities)
```
*

        - [Formatting](#formatting)
        - [Hover](#hover)
        - [Diagnostics](#diagnostics)
        - [Code Actions](#code-actions)
        - [Completion Suggestions](#completion-suggestions)
- [Using the Language server](#using-the-language-server)
    - [Neovim](#neovim)
        - [Installing the Programm](#installing-the-programm)
        - [Attaching](#attaching)
    - [VS-code](#vs-code)
    - [The Browser](#the-browser)
        - [WebAssembly](#webassembly)
            - [Tree-Sitter in WebAssembly](#tree-sitter-in-webassembly)
        - [The Editor](#the-editor)
        - [TextMate](#textmate)
        - [Plugging everything together](#plugging-everything-together)
- [How does Qlue-ls compare against other software?](#how-does-qlue-ls-compare-against-other-software)
    - [Qlue-ls vs sparql-formatter](#qlue-ls-vs-sparql-formatter)
- [Future work](#future-work)
    - [Stronger Parser](#stronger-parser)
    - [Query Sparql endpoint](#query-sparql-endpoint)
    - [Enhance existing features](#enhance-existing-features)
- [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

# Motivation

The problem of providing language support to developers is very old.

> In the past domain-specific development environments where very common.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the past, domain-specific development environments were very common.
```
1. Zeitangaben am Anfang in der Regel abtrennen. Machst du auch des öfteren nicht, glaube ich.
2. Das war "Domänenspezifische Umgebungen wo sehr geläufig." Schmeiß das h weg.

| Domain    | development environment |
| --------- | ----------------------- |
| Java      | Eclipse                 |
| Microsoft | Visual Studio           |
| C/C++     | Turbo C++               |
| python    | PyCharm                 |
| R         | RStudio                 |
| LaTeX     | TeXworks or Overleave   |

> These Programs contain source-code editors, but also provide a suit of integrated tool's that support the development process of their respective domains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These programs contain source-code editors, but also provide a suit of integrated tools that support the development process of their respective domains.
```
1. **
2. du meinst das Plural von tool, nicht das Eigentum von tool

That's why they are also referred to as IDE's (**I**ntegrated **D**evelopment **E**nvironment).

> While these development environments still dominate, modern development environments seem to go a different direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While these development environments still dominate, modern development environments seem to go into a different direction.
```
Präpositionen. Die ultimativen Feine bezüglich englischer Sprache

Some of the new kids on the block are: [neovim](https://neovim.io/), [vscode](https://code.visualstudio.com/) or [sublime text](https://www.sublimetext.com/).

> They all are **general purpose** code editors that have a open-source plugin ecosystem and allow for a personalized customization. A core maintainer of Neovim,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They all are **general purpose** code editors that have a open-source plugin ecosystem and allow a personalized customization. A core maintainer of Neovim,
```
Feinde.

[TJ DeVries](https://github.com/tjdevries), calls them PDE's (**P**ersonalized **D**evelopment **E**nvironment), although i don't think it caught on yet.

> Long story short: Language support in these PDE's is not build in, but provided via an extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Long story short: Language support in these PDE's is not built-in, but provided via an extension.
```
Das war sonst "Language Support ist nicht baut ein"

> This is made possible by a Protocol published by Microsoft in 2016: The **L**anguage **S**erver **P**rotocol (LSP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is made possible by a protocol published by Microsoft in 2016: The **L**anguage **S**erver **P**rotocol (LSP).
```
**

> It enables the Editor (LSP-Client) and the Language support program (LSP-Server or Language Server) to be separated into two independent components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It enables the editor (LSP-Client) and the Language support program (LSP-Server or Language Server) to be separated into two independent components.
```
**

![](img/language-server-sequence.png)
[^2]

> A key advantage of this architecture, is the reusablitity.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A key advantage of this architecture is the reusablitity.  
```
Bauchgefühlskommas werden ja immer als "Mädchenprobleme" bezeichnet...

Author: xD

> The language support has to be written only once, and not over and over again for every development tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The language support has to be written only once and not over and over again for every development tool.
```
Siehe letztes

![](img/lsp-languages-editors.png)[^8]

# Goal

> My goal is to create a Language Server for [SPARQL](https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/#rQueryUnit).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My goal is to create a language server for [SPARQL](https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/#rQueryUnit).
```
**

The language server should be able to **format** queries, give **diagnostic** reports and suggest **completions**.

> To work in the [Qlever-UI](https://qlever.cs.uni-freiburg.de/) the Language Server should be accessible from an editor which runs in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To work in the [Qlever-UI](https://qlever.cs.uni-freiburg.de/), the Language Server should be accessible from an editor which runs in the browser.
```
Solche Konstruktionen haben dafür immer ein Komma.

# The Language Server Protocol

> Let's talk briefly about the Protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's talk briefly about the protocol.
```
** (AAAH)

> It's build on top of [JSON-RPC](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification), a [*JSON*](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) based protocol that enables, as the name suggests, inter-process communication.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's built on top of [JSON-RPC](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification), a [*JSON*](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) based protocol that enables, as the name suggests, inter-process communication.  
```
SIMPLE PAST. SIMPLE past.

> This means the development tool (in our case the editor) and the language server run in two separate processes and communicate asynchronously via **JSON-RPC**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the development tool (in our case the editor) and the language server run in two separate processes and communicate asynchronously via **JSON-RPC**.
```
Klingt so flüssiger

## JSON-RPC

> I will give you just a brief introduction, if you want to know more you can read the [specification](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification#id1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I will just give you a brief introduction, if you want to know more, you can read the [specification](https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification#id1).
```
war deutsche Satzstellung

A normal JSON-RPC request has a `id`, `method` and `params` field.  
The `method` is the name of the invoked operation, the `params` field contains the optional parameters for this invoked operation.

A normal JSON-RPC response has a `id` and `result` field.  
The `id` has to be the same as the `id` of the corresponding request. This enables asynchronous communication.  
The `params` contain the result of the operation, if present.

{{< notice example >}}
 Request: `{"jsonrpc": "2.0", "method": "add", "params": [21, 21], "id": 1}`
 Response: `{"jsonrpc": "2.0", "result": 42, "id": 1}`
{{< /notice >}}

There are also notifications[^4] and error responses, but we will omit them for now.

## Document synchronization

> For the Language server to do anything, it's required to "see" the workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the language server to do anything, it's required to "see" the workspace.
```
Why? Out of nothing? Why?

The LSP-specification defines 3 [Document Synchronization](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_synchronization) methods for this purpose:
 - [`textDocument/didOpen`](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_didOpen)
 - [`textDocument/didChange`](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_didChange)
 - [`textDocument/didClose`](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_didClose)

> which are mandatory to implement (for clients).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are mandatory to implement (for clients).  
```
Zu viele Stichpunkte für eine Fortführung vom vorigen Satz.

> Whenever a document is being opened, changed or closed the client is sending the information to the server, via these methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever a document is being opened, changed or closed, the client is sending the information to the server via these methods.
```
Neun Worte früher is besser. Immer Zeitangabe-Komma-RestDesSatzes. Das hintere war wieder ein Bauchgefühlkomma.

The [textDocument/didChange](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_didChange) notification[^4] supports full and incremental synchronization.
The server and client negotiate this during [initialization](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#initialize).

Incremental changes were more diffucult than expected.
This is mainly because of the translation between different encodings.

> Editors give the position in the text-document (row, column) based on an utf-16 string representation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Editors give the position in the text-document (row, column) based on the utf-16 string representation.
```
Es ist keine random utf-16 string representation, oder?

While the chars them self are encoded in utf-8.

> Of course utf-8 is a variable length encoding, so different characters can have different byte-sizes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, utf-8 is a variable length encoding, so different characters can have different byte-sizes.
```
Nach of course immer ein Komma.

![](img/encodings.png)

This was a bit confusing to get right.

> Through these messages the language server has a "mirrored" version of the editor state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through these messages, the language server has a "mirrored" version of the editor state.
```

{{< notice example >}}

>  Here is a example for a incremental **textDocument/didChange** notification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Here is an example for a incremental **textDocument/didChange** notification.
```
Vor Nomen mit Vokal am Anfang immer "an"

Author: Englisch ist dumm

```json
 {
	"params": {
		"contentChanges": [
			{
				"rangeLength": 6, //deprecated
				"text": "42",
				"range": {
					"end": {
						"line": 3,
						"character": 22
					},
					"start": {
						"line": 3,
						"character": 16
					}
				}
			}
		],
		"textDocument": {
			"uri": "file:\/\/\/home\/ianni\/code\/sparql-language-server\/example.sparql",
			"version": 227
		}
	},
	"jsonrpc": "2.0",
	"method": "textDocument\/didChange"
}
```
{{< /notice >}}

## Capabilities

When initialization and synchronization work, the real fun begins.  

> Now we can implement complex language features and provide actual smarts to the editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can implement complex language features and provide actual smarts to the editor,
```
Siehe nächster edit.

As long as both the client and server support the capability.

> Here is an **incomplete** list of Language Feature capabilities that made it into the specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an **incomplete** list of language feature capabilities that made it into the specification
```
** AAAAH

> | capability                                                                                                                                         | effect                                                        | State of implementation |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Capability                                                                                                                                         | Effect                                                        | State of implementation |
```
Wenn doch bitte einheitlich

| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------- |

> | [Go to Declaration](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_declaration)          | Jump to the declaration of a symbol                          | Not planned             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Go to declaration](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_declaration)          | Jump to the declaration of a symbol                          | Not planned             |
```
S. o.

> | [Go to Definition](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_definition)            | Jump to the definition of a symbol                           | Not planned             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Go to definition](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_definition)            | Jump to the definition of a symbol                           | Not planned             |
```
s.o.

> | [Document Highlight](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_documentHighlight)   | Highlight  all references to a symbol                         | Planned                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Document highlight](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_documentHighlight)   | Highlight  all references to a symbol                         | Planned                 |
```
s.o.

> | [Document Link]()                                                                                                                                  | Handle Links in a Document                                    | Planned                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Document link]()                                                                                                                                  | Handle links in a document                                    | Planned                 |
```
1. s.o.
2. AAAAAH

> | [Hover](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_hover)                            | Show Information about the hovered symbol                     | In progess              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Hover](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_hover)                            | Show information about the symbol hovered above                     | In progess              |
```
1. AAAAAAH
2. das Symbod, über dem gehovered wird, nicht das hovernde symbol, oder?

> | [Folding Range](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_hover)                    | Indentify  foladable ranges in the document.                  | Not planned             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Folding range](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_hover)                    | Indentify  foladable ranges in the document.                  | Not planned             |
```
1. s.o.
2. Sorry kann mir nichts aus foladable zusammenreimen, das musst du selber machen.

> | [Document Symbols](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_documentSymbol)        | Identify all symbols in a document                            | Not planned             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Document symbols](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_documentSymbol)        | Identify all symbols in a document                            | Not planned             |
```
s.o.

> | [Inline Value](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_inlineValue)               | Show Values in the editor                                     | Not Planned             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Inline value](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_inlineValue)               | Show values in the editor                                     | Not Planned             |
```
1. s.o.
2. AAAAAAAH

> | [Completion Proposals](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_completion)        | Give Completion Proposals to the user                         | In progress             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Completion proposals](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_completion)        | Give completion proposals to the user                         | In progress             |
```
1. s.o.
2. AAAAAAAAH

> | [Publish Diagnostics](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_publishDiagnostics) | Send Information like Hints, Warnings or Errors to the editor | In progress             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Publish diagnostics](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_publishDiagnostics) | Send information like hints, warnings or errors to the editor | In progress             |
```
1. s.o.
2. AAAAAAAAAH

> | [Pull Diagnostics](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_pullDiagnostics)       | Request Information like Hints, Warningso Errors              | In progress             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Pull diagnostics](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_pullDiagnostics)       | Request Information like hints, warnings or Errors              | In progress             |
```
1. s.o.
2. AAAAAAAAAAH
3. typo

> | [Code Action](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_codeAction)                 | Suggest changes                                               | In progress             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Code action](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_codeAction)                 | Suggest changes                                               | In progress             |
```
s.o.

| [Formatting](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_formatting)                  | Format the whole document                                     | Done                    |

> | [Range Formatting](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_rangeFormatting)       | Format the provided range in a document                       | Not Planned             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Range formatting](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_rangeFormatting)       | Format the provided range in a document                       | Not planned             |
```
1. s.o.
2. s.o.

| [Rename](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_rangeFormatting)                 | Rename a symbol                                               | Planned                 |

# Implementation

Let's talk about what I actually did.

> I choose to use [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) for this project since its fancy and I like shiny things.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I chose to use [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) for this project since it's fancy and I like shiny things.  
```
1. choose ist Präsenz. Du hast aber schon rust ausgewählt.
2. Rust ist fancy, nicht die fancy (auch verwendet als "Fantasie") von Rust

Rust is the most admired programming language in the [Stack overflow developer survey 2024](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2024/technology#2-programming-scripting-and-markup-languages),

> and i was curious to find out why. After this project I can confirm that Rust is a brilliant language, but the leading curve is quiet steep.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and i was curious to find out why. After this project, I can confirm that Rust is a brilliant language, but the leading curve is quiet steep.
```
Zeit-Komma-Rest

> The error handling, increddibly smart compiler, functional approach and rich ecosystem enable a smooth developing expirience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The error handling, incredibly smart compiler, functional approach and rich ecosystem enable a smooth developing experience.
```
1. süß
2. *sich einrollende Zehen*

That being said, the very strict compiler makes it hard to get stuff done quickly, however the resulting code is a lot more robust.

Here is the module structure of my crate[^5]:

![](img/code_structure.svg)

## speaking JSON-RPC

Okay first things first, we need to speak **JSON-RPC**.  
After that we can implement some tool to analyze SPARQL queries.  

> When we got the analysis tool running we can use it to provide some language features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we got the analysis tool running, we can use it to provide some language features.
```
Zeit-Komma-Rest

> Assume we set up the Editor (client) to connect to our language server.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assume we set up the editor (client) to connect to our language server.  
```
AAAAAAAAAAAh

It will send an utf-8 byte-stream. We need to interpret the bytes and respond.

> The first message will look something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first message will look like something like this:
```
Bin mir nicht sicher, anderes klingt aber bissl komisch, ka.

```json
{
	"jsonrpc": "2.0",
	"id": 1,
	"method": "initialize",
	"params": {
		"capabilities": {...},
		"clientInfo": {
			"name": "Neovim",
			"version": "0.10.2+v0.10.2"
		},
		"processId": 6369,
		...
	}
}
```

> For each type of message I build a set of corresponding structs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each type of message, I built a set of corresponding structs:
```
1. whatever
2. SIMPLE past

```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug, PartialEq)]
pub struct Message {
    pub jsonrpc: String,
}

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug, PartialEq)]
pub struct RequestMessageBase {
    #[serde(flatten)]
    pub base: Message,
    /**
     * The request id.
     */
    pub id: RequestId,
    /**
     * The method to be invoked.
     */
    pub method: String,
}

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug, PartialEq, Clone)]
#[serde(untagged)]
pub enum RequestId {
    String(String),
    Integer(u32),
}

#[derive(Debug, Serialize, Deserialize, PartialEq)]
#[serde(rename_all = "camelCase")]
pub struct InitializeParams {
    pub process_id: ProcessId,
    pub client_info: Option<ClientInfo>,
    #[serde(flatten)]
    pub progress_params: WorkDoneProgressParams,
}

#[derive(Debug, Serialize, Deserialize, PartialEq)]
#[serde(untagged)]
pub enum ProcessId {
    Integer(i32),
    Null,
}

#[derive(Debug, Serialize, Deserialize, PartialEq)]
pub struct ClientInfo {
    pub name: String,
    pub version: Option<String>,
}
```

For **se**rializing and **de**serializing I used [serde](https://serde.rs/).  

> Note that in Rust the notion of "Inheritance" does not exist. It uses "traits" to define shared behavior.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that in Rust the notion of "inheritance" does not exist. It uses "traits" to define shared behavior.  
```
AAAAAAAAAAAAH

I solved this issue with `#[serde(flatten)]`, which inlines the data from a struct into a parent struct.  
Another issue was the naming convention.  

> I JSON-RPC the fields are written in *camelCase*, but Rust uses *snake_case*.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In JSON-RPC the fields are written in *camelCase*, but Rust uses *snake_case*.  
```
Ja, du JSON-RPC. Voll.

| message                                                                                                                                      | sender | type         | effect                              |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------ | ------------ | ----------------------------------- |
| [textDocument/didOpen](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_didOpen)     | client | notification | signals newly opened text document   |
| [textDocument/didChange](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_didChange) | client | notification | signals changes to a text document   |
| [textDocument/didClose](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textDocument_didClose)   | client | notification | signals closed text document |

> With these messages defined, we can open and close a connection to a client and keep a synchronized state of the clients documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these messages defined, we can open and close a connection to a client and keep a synchronized state of the client's documents.
```
Ja, synchronisierter Zustand der Clients. Seh ich auch so.

> To run this native i also needed to listen to stdin and parse the [Header](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#headerPart) from raw bytes, but i spare you that experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run this native I also needed to listen to stdin and parse the [Header](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#headerPart) from raw bytes, but i spare you that experience.
```
Du. Wichtig. Großgeschrieben.

## Parser: the Engine under the hood

> Okay now we want to build some tools to analyze the given text,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okay, now we want to build some tools to analyze the given text,
```
Komma nach/vor Einschüben

and provide some smarts.

First we need to "understand" the given text.
Understanding arbitrary text is quiet the challenge, and we only recently made some advancements in that area.

> Luckily all SPARQL queries follow a strict structure, called a grammar, which is defined in its [specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/#rQuery).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Luckily, all SPARQL queries follow a strict structure, called a grammar, which is defined in its [specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/#rQuery).
```
Nach Adverben am Satzanfang kommt idR ein Komma.

A grammar is basically a set of production rules that map nonterminal-symbols to other nonterminal-symbols or terminal-symbols. Every valid SPARQL query can be produced by applying those rules until only terminal symbols are left.

> For some grammars we can build a program that reconstructs which production rules got used to produce a given string. Such a program is called **parser**. The result of a parser, the rules that got used, is called **syntax tree**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some grammars, we can build a program that reconstructs which production rules got used to produce a given string. Such a program is called **parser**. The result of a parser, the rules that got used, is called **syntax tree**.
```
Einschub bla

Here is an example:

**Query**:
```sparql
SELECT * WHERE {
  ?s ?p ?p
}
```

**Syntax tree:**
```lisp
(unit ; [0, 0] - [3, 0]
  (SelectQuery ; [0, 0] - [2, 1]
    (SelectClause ; [0, 0] - [0, 8]
      "SELECT" ; [0, 0] - [0, 6]
      "*") ; [0, 7] - [0, 8]
    (WhereClause ; [0, 9] - [2, 1]
      "WHERE" ; [0, 9] - [0, 14]
      (GroupGraphPattern ; [0, 15] - [2, 1]
        "{" ; [0, 15] - [0, 16]
        (GroupGraphPatternSub ; [1, 2] - [1, 10]
          (TriplesBlock ; [1, 2] - [1, 10]
            (TriplesSameSubjectPath ; [1, 2] - [1, 10]
              (VAR) ; [1, 2] - [1, 4]
              (PropertyListPathNotEmpty ; [1, 5] - [1, 10]
                (VAR) ; [1, 5] - [1, 7]
                (ObjectList ; [1, 8] - [1, 10]
                  (VAR)))))) ; [1, 8] - [1, 10]
        "}")))) ; [2, 0] - [2, 1]
```

### Tree-sitter

Usually parses get to parse complete strings that are valid.

> When you give them invalid input they react not so happy (symbolic image below)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you give them invalid input they react less happy (symbolic image below).
```
1. Sounds better.
2. Satz beenden mit Punkt.

![](img/resiliant-parsers.png)
[^3]

> In our use-case the text we handle is incomplete most of the time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our use-case, the text we handle is incomplete most of the time.
```
Einschub bla

So we need a parser that is resilient to errors.

The big-boy-language-servers like [rust-analyser](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer) use customized [resilient LL Parsers](https://matklad.github.io/2023/05/21/resilient-ll-parsing-tutorial.html).

> But since I wanted to get on the road quick, I choose [tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/) (for now... ;)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But since I wanted to get on the road quickly, I chose [tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/) (for now... ;)).
```
1. Verben beschreibt man mit Adverben, nicht Adjektiven.
2. SIMPLE past.

Tree-sitter, at its core, is a parser generator. It generates error resilient parsers.

> Its most commonly used in editors like [neovim](https://neovim.io/) or emacs[^6] to highlight text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's most commonly used in editors like [neovim](https://neovim.io/) or emacs[^6] to highlight text.
```
Nicht sein most commonly used. Nein. Böse.

Parser generators take a grammar and generate a fully functioning parser.
I found a [sparql-tree-sitter](https://github.com/GordianDziwis/tree-sitter-sparql) grammar by [GordianDziwis](https://github.com/GordianDziwis).
It had a few minor issues and was a bit dusty.
So I [forked](https://github.com/GordianDziwis) it and it and changed a few things to work better with Rust.

If you want to take a close look at the parser:

1. Clone the grammar-repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/IoannisNezis/tree-sitter-sparql.git
cd tree-sitter-sparql
```

2. Install the [tree-sitter CLI](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/creating-parsers#installation)
3. Start the playground web-app:
```bash
tree-sitter playground
```

The generated parser is written in C.
For some C-reasons I won't get into right now, tree-sitter can generate rust-bindings that allow us to call the c-functions from our rust-program (something I will regret later).
It provides some functions to parse and navigate the resulting concrete-syntax-tree.

{{< notice example >}}

> Here is an example from the format function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of the format function:
```
Bei from hätte die format function das example geschrieben.

```rust
   let mut parser = Parser::new();
   match parser.set_language(&tree_sitter_sparql::LANGUAGE.into()) {
    Ok(()) => {
        let tree = parser
            .parse(text.as_bytes(), None)
            .expect("could not parse");
        let formatted_text =
            format_helper(&text, &mut tree.walk(), 0, "  ", "", &format_settings);
        return formatted_text;
    }
    Err(_) => panic!("Could not setup parser"),
}
```
{{< /notice >}}

A cool feature of tree-sitter is [queries](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/using-parsers#pattern-matching-with-queries).

> A query is build out of one or more patterns. Each pattern is an [S-expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-expression).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A query is built out of one or more patterns. Each pattern is an [S-expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-expression).
```
Ganz gemein. Passive voice.

                          (PrefixedName
                            (PNAME_NS
                              (PN_PREFIX))
                            (PN_LOCAL)))))))
                (ObjectList
                  object: (RdfLiteral
                    value: (String
                      (STRING_LITERAL))))))
            (TriplesSameSubjectPath
              subject: (VAR)
              (PropertyListPathNotEmpty
                predicate: (Path
                  (PathSequence
                    (PathEltOrInverse
                      (PathElt
                        (PathPrimary
                          (PrefixedName
                            (PNAME_NS
                              (PN_PREFIX))
                            (PN_LOCAL)))))))
                (ObjectList
                  object: (RdfLiteral
                    value: (String
                      (STRING_LITERAL))))))))))))
```

And here is the query:
```lisp
(TriplesSameSubjectPath
  (VAR)
  (PropertyListPathNotEmpty
    (Path) @path (#eq? @path "pre:p1"))) @triple
```
`@path` and `@triple` are captures and store the nodes that match the pattern.
{{< /notice >}}

#### How resilient is tree-sitter?

> Very, resilient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Very resilient.
```
Sehr, resilient. Es ist sehr und resilient. Wohl eher nicht.

Tree-sitter recovers from basically anything and conserves information from very incomplete input.
So the question is not how resilient it is, the problem is how good the quality of the information it conserves is.

Tree-sitter produces GLR parsers.
It explores, nondeterministically, many different possible LR (bottom-up) parses.
Then it chooses the "the best one".

> In the words of [Alex Kladov](https://github.com/matklad) the creator of [rust-anayzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer) this leads to the following behavior:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the words of [Alex Kladov](https://github.com/matklad), the creator of [rust-anayzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer), this leads to the following behavior:
```
"Nachgestellte Erläuterungen werden mit Kommata abgetrennt."

>(...) Tree-sitter \[can\] recognize many complete valid small fragments of a tree, but it might have trouble
> assembling them into incomplete larger fragments.

> This is very useful for the use-case of syntax highlighting. You want to highlight as many tokens as possible, the larger context of in which they appear is often not so important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is very useful for the use-case of syntax highlighting. You want to highlight as many tokens as possible, the larger context in which they appear is often not so important.
```
Huh?

> In our use-case however, it's the other way around.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our use-case, however, it's the other way around.
```
Füllwort ->Komma

Let's look at a few examples.

## Implemented Capabilities

> Okay, now that you may have an idea of the fundamental mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okay, now that you may have an idea of the fundamental mechanisms,
```
s. nächster Kommentar

> Let's talk about the features, besides the lifecycle and synchronization, that I implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let's talk about the features, besides the lifecycle and synchronization that I implemented.
```
Ich bin über dem Strich, ja. Das Drama im Text aber auch.

{{< notice warning >}}
The implemented features are just a **proof of concept**!
There are many features that could and should be added.
But that takes a lot of time to get right.

> And frankly also requires a stronger parser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And, frankly, also requires a stronger parser.
```
klingt sonst als würde Frankly was brauchen

This should just give you an idea of what's possible.
{{< /notice >}}

### Formatting

When the client sends a `textDocument/formatting` request, the server returns a list of [`TextEdit`](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textEdit)'s.

> A `TextEdit` is a incremental change, composed of a Range and a String.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `TextEdit` is a incremental change, composed of a range and a string.
```
AAAAAAAAAAAAAH
(Ich dachte es wär vorbei.)

> The Client then applies the changes and thus formats the document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client then applies the changes and thus formats the document.
```
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAH
Zu früh gefreut

I implemented this with a post-order-[traversal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_traversal) of the parse-tree provided by tree-sitter.

![](img/postorder-traversal.png)
[^7]

> Each step the "Type" of the node is matched and handled with a strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each step, the "type" of the node is matched and handled with a strategy.
```
1. ist fast wie eine Zeitangabe
2. AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH

    }
    ```

- **Long lines**: should cause a line break
    ```sparql
    SELECT ?v1 ?v3 ?v4 ?v5 ?v6 ?v7 ?v8 ?v9 ?v10
           ?v11 ?v12 ?v13 ?v14 ?v15 ?v16 ?v17
           ?v18 ?v19 ?v20 ?v21 ?v22 ?v23 ?v24
           ?v25 ?v26 ?v27 ?v28 ?v29 ?v30 ?v31
    WHERE {}
    ```
- **small nested queries**: should be compressed
    ```sparql
    SELECT ?castle WHERE {
        osmrel:51701 ogc:contains ?castle .
        { { ?castle osmkey:historic "castle" }
          UNION
          { ?castle osmkey:historic "tower" . ?castle osmkey:castle_type "defensive" } }
        UNION
        { ?castle osmkey:historic "archaeological_site" . ?castle osmkey:site_type "fortification" }
        ?castle osmkey:name ?name .
        ?castle osmkey:ruins ?ruins .
        OPTIONAL { ?castle osmkey:historic ?class }
        OPTIONAL { ?castle osmkey:archaeological_site ?class }
    }
    ```

### Hover

When the client sends a `textDocument/hover` to request, the server responds with information about a given position in a text-document.

This is useful to give inexperienced users documentation about how some constructs work:

 ![](img/examples/hover-filter.png)

#### Ideas for the future

> Here are a few ideas I have to extend this feature.

Reviewer: Hier sind paar Ideen du musst das Feature ausbauen? Was meinste? Hier musste auch selber ran.

if you have a cool idea, [open an issue on github](https://github.com/IoannisNezis/Qlue-ls/issues) :)

### Diagnostics

A diagnostic is information provided by the language server about an issue in the source code.
They can be of different *severity*:
- **Error**: Critical issues; must be fixed (e.g., syntax errors, undefined variables).
- **Warning**: Potential problems; should be reviewed (e.g., deprecated functions, unused variables).
- **Info**: General insights; optional attention (e.g., code style improvements, documentation suggestions).
- **Hint**: Suggestions for enhancement (e.g., refactor opportunities, alternative approaches).

Diagnostics are either published by the server via a `textDocument/publishDiagnostics` notification,
or requested by the client via a `textDocument/diaglostic` request.

The diagnostics I implemented are:
- an error diagnostic for undeclared prefixes
- a warning diagnostic for unused prefixes
- an information diagnostic for uncompressed URI's

![](img/examples/diagnostics.png)

#### Ideas for the future

Highlight syntax errors:

![](img/examples/diagnostics-syntax.png)

> This would require a more powerful parser, that gives information about how the parse failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would require a more powerful parser that gives information about how the parse failed.
```
Das that bezieht sich auf den parser, oder?

Highlight semantic errors, like selecting all variables in a `GROUP BY`:

![](img/examples/diagnostic-syntax.png)

Giving hints to make queries more concise:
![](img/examples/diagnostic-compress-triples.png)
![](img/examples/diagnostic-compress-obj.png)

### Code Actions

The `textDocument/codeAction` request is send from the client to the server to request a set of commands for a given range in a textdocument. These commands can have arbitrary effect, but in most cases change the text-document through text-edits.

{{< notice note >}}
The change of the text-document is always done by the client (editor).
The server provides the text-edits but its up to the client to apply them since it "owns" the text-document.
{{< /notice >}}

> Often code-actions correspond to a diagnostic they resolve. Such code-actions are called "quickfix".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often, code-actions correspond to a diagnostic they resolve. Such code-actions are called "quickfix".
```
Zeiten und so

The exemplary code action I implemented is "Shorten URI".
The idea is to shorten a URI into its compact ["Curie"](https://www.w3.org/TR/2010/NOTE-curie-20101216/) form.

| Before code action                       | After code action                       |
| ---------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/code-action-before.png) | ![](img/examples/code-action-after.png) |

This code-action is powered by [curies.rs](https://github.com/biopragmatics/curies.rs).

### Completion Suggestions
The key feature for a SPARQL language server is, in my opinion, code-completion.
Here the editor provides suggestions to the user.

> In SPARQL this is not just a convenience. Without smart completion suggestsions a user has to know the ontology by heart. Its also a massive efficiency boost for experianced users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In SPARQL this is not just a convenience. Without smart completion suggestions a user has to know the ontology by heart. Its also a massive efficiency boost for experianced users.
```
typo

Here is a possible structure for completions:

#### 1. Static

The simplest kind of completions is just to provide static snippets of keywords or structures to the user.
For this just the "Location" of the cursor is relevant, the context of the content of the knowledge-graph does not influence the suggestions.

> Here are a few Examples i implemented:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are a few examples i implemented:
```
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH

#### 2.1. Online

Here the Language Server uses data from a SPARQL-endpoint to provide completion suggestions.
{{< notice warning >}}
This is not implemented yet!
{{< /notice >}}

Here is a example from the Qlever-OSM-endpoint: <htps://qlever.cs.uni-freiburg.de/api/osm-planet/>.
[**O**pen**S**treet**M**ap](https://www.openstreetmap.org/) (OSM) is a Project that collects Geodata that is publicly accessible. Basically Google-maps, just without Google.
This data can be represented in an RDF knowledge graph and queried using SPARQL.
For example this query returns every bicycle parking spot in [Freiburg](https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/62768):
```sparql
PREFIX geo: <http://www.opengis.net/ont/geosparql#>
PREFIX osmkey: <https://www.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:>
PREFIX ogc: <http://www.opengis.net/rdf#>
PREFIX osmrel: <https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/>
PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
SELECT ?bicycle_parking ?geometry WHERE {
  osmrel:62768 ogc:sfContains ?bicycle_parking .
  ?bicycle_parking osmkey:amenity "bicycle_parking" ;
                   geo:hasGeometry/geo:asWKT ?geometry .
}
```

Now I want to know the same thing just for Berlin.  

> Unfortunately i forgot that the relation ID of Berlin is `62422`...  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, i forgot that the relation ID of Berlin is `62422`...  
```
Adverb Komma Rest

A good online-contextual-completion should help me:

|                            |                           |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/online-cmp-before.png) | ![](img/examples/online-cmp-after.png) |

# Using the Language server

Ok, now let's talk about how to use the language server.
An editor needs to have a language server client and connect to our server.

I looked at three editors: neovim, vs-code, and a custom web-based-editor.

## Neovim

> To get a language server running with neovim is very easy because it has a build in language client and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get a language server running with neovim is very easy because it has a built-in language client and
```
Bau ein Sprache. Ich müsste mir das mal merken und auf deutsch so reden.

neovim is build to be hacked.

### Installing the Program

First `Qlue-ls` needs to be available as executable binary on the system, neovim runs on.
You could just build the binary from source.

> But to make it more convenient I added the binary into two "repositories":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But to make it more convenient, I added the binary into two "repositories":
```
to-Konstruktion -> Komma

The Rust repository [crate.io](https://crates.io/crates/qlue-ls). To install from there, run:
```shell
cargo install qlue-ls
```
And the python repository [Pypi](https://pypi.org/project/qlue-ls/). To install from there, run:
```shell
pipx install qlue-ls
```

> The python package is build with the help of [maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The python package is built with the help of [maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin).
```
Ist baut.

### Attaching

All you need is a `init.lua` file in your config directory with the following snippet:

```lua
vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd({ 'FileType' }, {
  desc = 'Connect to qlue-ls',
  pattern = { 'sparql' },
  callback = function()
    vim.lsp.start {
      name = 'qlue-ls',
      cmd = { 'qlue-ls', 'server' },
      root_dir = vim.fn.getcwd(),
      on_attach = function(client, bufnr)
        vim.keymap.set('n', '<leader>f', vim.lsp.buf.format, { buffer = bufnr, desc = 'LSP: ' .. '[F]ormat' })
      end,
    }
  end,
})
```

> When you open a `sparql` file (a file with suffix `.rq`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you open a `sparql` file (a file with suffix `.rq`),
```

> This runs the command `qlue-ls server` and connects the language client to this process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this runs the command `qlue-ls server` and connects the language client to this process.
```
drama

## VS-code

> In vs-code there is no build in language-client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In vs-code, there is no built-in language-client.
```
1. Ort Komma
2. Ich bau gleich auch was ein.

Instead, you have to create a vs-code-extention that acts as a language-client.

> I will do that in the Future™.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I will do that in the future™.
```
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH

## The Browser

Okay, now the for the cherry on top:
Let's connect this thing to a web-based editor (an editor that runs in a browser).
"But wait!" you might say, "browser is JavaScript land".
And you would be right, until 2017.

### WebAssembly

[WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/) is a open standard defined by the [World Wide Web Consortium](https://www.w3.org/).
It defines a Bytecode to run programs withing the browser.
All big browsers support it.

> If your Program can be converted (compiled) to this WebAssembly(WASM) Bytecode it can execute in the Browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your program can be converted (compiled) to this WebAssembly(WASM) Bytecode, it can execute in the Browser.
```
1. AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH
2. Ort Komma

![](img/WebAssembly-data-flow-architecture.png)[^9]
So now we need to build a compiler to convert Rust to WASM Bytecode...

> Unfortunately [some strangers on the Internet](https://github.com/rustwasm/team) already did that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, [some strangers on the Internet](https://github.com/rustwasm/team) already did that.
```
Adverb Komma

> The Project is called [wasm-pack](https://rustwasm.github.io/wasm-pack/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project is called [wasm-pack](https://rustwasm.github.io/wasm-pack/).
```
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH

It's very organic and simple, you just annotate the method or struct you want to "export" to WASM.

```rust
#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn init_language_server(writer: web_sys::WritableStreamDefaultWriter) -> Server {
    wasm_logger::init(wasm_logger::Config::default());
    Server::new(move |message| send_message(&writer, message))
}
```

Then wasm-pack builds WASM-bytecode and JavaScript "glue code".
This glue code does a lot off stuff to bridge the gap between JavaScript and WASM.

```javascript
...
export function init_language_server(writer) {
    const ret = wasm.init_language_server(writer);
    return Server.__wrap(ret);
}
...
```

> To actually run this in the browser I needed to jump through a couple more hoops but I spare you the details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To actually run this in the browser, I needed to jump through a couple more hoops but I spare you the details.
```
To Komma
Wie gnädig von dir, zum zweiten Mal.

I packaged the result and uploaded it to [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/qlue-ls): a JavaScript repository.
Now we can install the package using npm and access it from a JavaScript file:

```bash
npm install qlue-ls
```

```javascript
import { init_language_server } from "qlue-ls";
const server = init_language_server(...);
server.listen(...);
```

#### Tree-Sitter in WebAssembly

> As stated earlier tree-sitter creates a parser in c and I wrote my program in Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As stated earlier, tree-sitter creates a parser in c and I wrote my program in Rust.
```
Vergleich am Satzanfang -> Komma

Turns our compiling a Rust program that calls external C functions to WebAssembly creates something
called "**ABI-Incompatibilities**".

> I wish I could tell you how I solved that, but to be honest, I don't want to talk about this experience, since it was extremely painful.

Reviewer: oje, beileid

In short, I found a [project](https://github.com/shadaj/tree-sitter-c2rust) that ports the C code to Rust and all my issues disappeared.
This is the second reason for me to move away from tree-sitter.

### The Editor

> Next we need a web-based editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we need a web-based editor.
```
Zeit Komma

> There are a couple options, here are a few:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a couple options. Here are a few:
```
Sonst zu pausenlos. Wie mein aktueller Sprechdurchfall.

- [Monaco-Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/)
- [CodeMirror](https://codemirror.net/)
- [ACE Editor](https://ace.c9.io/)

> None of them have built in language clients, but all of them have extensions that provides one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
None of them have built-in language clients, but all of them have extensions that provides one.
```
Danke. Danke. Danke. War das Zufall?

Author: jup

- Monaco-Editor: [monaco-languageclient](https://github.com/TypeFox/monaco-languageclient)
- CodeMirror: [@shopify/codemirror-language-client](https://github.com/shopify/theme-tools), [codemirror-languageserver](https://github.com/FurqanSoftware/codemirror-languageserver), [codemirror-languageservice](https://github.com/remcohaszing/codemirror-languageservice)
- ACE Editor: [ace-linters](https://github.com/mkslanc/ace-linters)

> But to be fair the ones for CodeMirror don't really look stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But to be fair, the ones for CodeMirror don't really look stable.
```
To Komma

I decided to go with Monaco for a couple reasons:

- It's very mature (It's the same editor that drives vs-code)
- The language-client extension looks very active.
- I hope to get a synergy effect since both LSP and Monaco are from Microsoft

I will eventually also try ACE.

> To get Monaco running with the language client I again had to jump to a few hoops (actually a lot),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get Monaco running with the language client, I had to jump through a few hoops again (actually a lot),
```
1. To Komma
2. zu deutsche Satzstellung
3. Springst du zu oder durch Ringe?
Anyways, du springst ganz schön oft

> but I again spare you with the details.

Reviewer: Gnädig. Zum dritten mal.

### TextMate

> A good editor needs Syntax highlighting. (The thing that makes the colors)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good editor needs syntax highlighting. (The thing that makes the colors.)
```
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH

| python    | PyCharm                 |
| R         | RStudio                 |
| LaTeX     | TeXworks or Overleave   |

These programs contain source-code editors, but also provide a suit of integrated tools that support the development process of their respective domains.
That's why they are also referred to as IDE's (**I**ntegrated **D**evelopment **E**nvironment).
While these development environments still dominate, modern development environments seem to go into a different direction.

Some of the new kids on the block are: [neovim](https://neovim.io/), [vscode](https://code.visualstudio.com/) or [sublime text](https://www.sublimetext.com/).
They all are **general purpose** code editors that have a open-source plugin ecosystem and allow a personalized customization. A core maintainer of Neovim,
[TJ DeVries](https://github.com/tjdevries), calls them PDE's (**P**ersonalized **D**evelopment **E**nvironment), although I don't think it caught on yet.

Long story short: Language support in these PDE's is not built-in, but provided via an extension.
This is made possible by a protocol published by Microsoft in 2016: The **L**anguage **S**erver **P**rotocol (LSP).

> It enables the editor (LSP-Client) and the Language support program (LSP-Server or Language Server) to be separated into two independent components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It enables the editor (LSP-Client) and the Language support program (LSP-Server or Language Server) to be separated into two independent components.
```
Auch language support program entweder klein oder groß. Die Entscheidung kann ich dir nicht abnehmen.

![](img/language-server-sequence.png)
[^2]

> A key advantage of this architecture is the reusablitity.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A key advantage of this architecture is its reusablitity.  
```

The language support has to be written only once and not over and over again for every development tool.

![](img/lsp-languages-editors.png)[^7]

# Goal

My goal is to create a language server for [SPARQL](https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/#rQueryUnit).
The language server should be able to **format** queries, give **diagnostic** reports and suggest **completions**.

> To work in the [Qlever UI](https://qlever.cs.uni-freiburg.de/), the Language Server should be accessible from an editor which runs in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To work in the [Qlever UI](https://qlever.cs.uni-freiburg.de/), the language server should be accessible from an editor which runs in the browser.
```

It provides some functions to parse and navigate the resulting concrete-syntax-tree.

{{< notice example >}}
Here is an example of the format function:
```rust
   let mut parser = Parser::new();
   match parser.set_language(&tree_sitter_sparql::LANGUAGE.into()) {
    Ok(()) => {
        let tree = parser
            .parse(text.as_bytes(), None)
            .expect("could not parse");
        let formatted_text =
            format_helper(&text, &mut tree.walk(), 0, "  ", "", &format_settings);
        return formatted_text;
    }
    Err(_) => panic!("Could not setup parser"),
}
```
{{< /notice >}}

A cool feature of tree-sitter is [queries](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/using-parsers#pattern-matching-with-queries).
A query is built out of one or more patterns. Each pattern is an [S-expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-expression).
Tree-sitter can match these patterns against the syntax tree and return all matches.

{{< notice example >}}
Let's say we want to find all *triples* in a group-graph-pattern that have a predicate that match "pre:p1":
The query could look like:
```sparql
SELECT * WHERE {
    ?s pre:p2 "object1" .
    ?s2 pre:p1 "object2"
}
```

> My Tree-sitter parser would generate this parse-tree:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My tree-sitter parser would generate this parse-tree:
```

              (PropertyListPathNotEmpty
                predicate: (Path
                  (PathSequence
                    (PathEltOrInverse
                      (PathElt
                        (PathPrimary
                          (PrefixedName
                            (PNAME_NS
                              (PN_PREFIX))
                            (PN_LOCAL)))))))
                (ObjectList
                  object: (RdfLiteral
                    value: (String
                      (STRING_LITERAL))))))))))))
```

And here is the query:
```lisp
(TriplesSameSubjectPath
  (VAR)
  (PropertyListPathNotEmpty
    (Path) @path (#eq? @path "pre:p1"))) @triple
```
`@path` and `@triple` are captures and store the nodes that match the pattern.
{{< /notice >}}

#### How resilient is tree-sitter?

Very resilient.
Tree-sitter recovers from basically anything and conserves information from very incomplete input.
So the question is not how resilient it is, the problem is how good the quality of the information it conserves is.

Tree-sitter produces GLR parsers.
It explores, nondeterministically, many different possible LR (bottom-up) parses.
Then it chooses the "the best one".

> In the words of [Alex Kladov](https://github.com/matklad), the creator of [rust-anayzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer), this leads to the following behavior:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the words of [Alex Kladov](https://github.com/matklad), the creator of [rust-analyzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer), this leads to the following behavior:
```
denk ich mal

In our use-case, however, it's the other way around.

Let's look at a few examples.

## Implemented Capabilities

Okay, now that you may have an idea of the fundamental mechanisms,
let's talk about the features, besides the lifecycle and synchronization that I implemented.

{{< notice warning >}}
The implemented features are just a **proof of concept**!
There are many features that could and should be added.
But that takes a lot of time to get right.
And, frankly, also requires a stronger parser.
This should just give you an idea of what's possible.
{{< /notice >}}

### Formatting

When the client sends a `textDocument/formatting` request, the server returns a
list of [`TextEdit`](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specifications/lsp/3.17/specification/#textEdit)'s.
A `TextEdit` is a incremental change, composed of a range and a string.
The client then applies the changes, thus formatting the document.

![](img/TextEdits.svg)

#### Formatting Algorithm

After a few iterations, I came up with the following algorithm.

---

> **Input**: String (sequence of characters)  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Input**: string (sequence of characters)  
```

> **Output**: Sequence of TextEdit's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Output**: sequence of textedits
```

---

**Step 1**: Parse  
Use the [parser](#parser-the-engine-under-the-hood) to compute a sytax tree.  

![](img/SyntaxTree.svg)

**Step 2**: Separate  

> For each node kind, define a separator string. Then compute edits to speparate its child with this separator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each kind of node, define a separator string. Then compute edits to speparate its child with this separator.
```
wär sonst "für jedes Knoten nett"

![](img/FormattingSeparation.svg)

**Step 3**: Augment  

> For each note compute augmentation edits. These insert before, after, or in a node.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each node, compute augmentation edits. Insert these before, after, or in a node.  
```
denk ich mal

![](img/FormattingAugmentation.svg)

---

{{< notice "note" >}}

> In my implementation **Step 2** and **Step 3** are executed in a recursive manner.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In my implementation, **Step 2** and **Step 3** are executed in a recursive manner.  
```

> When traversing the tree, a indentation level is parsed down the tree and increased based on the node kind.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When traversing the tree, a indentation level is parsed down the tree and increased based on the kind of the node.  
```
sehr deutscher Fehler

> **Step 2** and **3** are, in its essence, a [catamorphism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catamorphism)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 2** and **3** are, in their essence, a [catamorphism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catamorphism)
```

from a syntax tree to a sequence of edits.  

> Here of course a syntax tree is a [endofunctor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functor#endofunctor) in the category 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, of course, a syntax tree is a [endofunctor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functor#endofunctor) in the category 
```

> of types and functions, but i digress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of types and functions, but I am digressing.
```

#### Results

Here are a few examples to give you an idea.  
If want to get a better understanding of the behaviour of this formatter,  
try it out in the [demo](https://qlue-ls.com).

```sparql
BASE <http://...>
PREFIX namespace1: <iri>
PREFIX namespace12: <iri>
SELECT ?s ?p (MAX (?o)  AS ?max_a )
FROM <...>
FROM <...>
WHERE {
    {
        ?s namespace1:p1 ?o ;
          namespace12:p2 "dings" .
        ?other <abc> 32 .
        FILTER ((?other * 4) > 6 || ?o = "bar")
    }
    UNION {
        {
            SELECT * WHERE {
                ?a ?b ?c .
                BIND (?c + 3 AS ?var)
            }
            GROUP BY ?a
            HAVING ?b > 9
            ORDER BY DESC(?a)
            LIMIT 100
            OFFSET 10
        }
    }
}
```

```sparql
SELECT * WHERE {
    wd:Q11571 p:P166 [ pq:P585 ?date ] .
    wd:Q11572 p:P166 [
        pq:P585 ?date ;
        <...> ?other
    ]
    wd:Q11572 p:P166 []
}
```

```sparql
SELECT * WHERE {
    ?a ?b ",,," FILTER (1 IN (1, 2, 3))
}
```

```sparql
SELECT * WHERE {
    ?a <iri>/^a/(!<>?)+ | (<iri> | ^a | a) ?b .
}
```

I added some optional formatting, like aligning prefix declarations and predicates.

> Here is an example for a query with every non default option:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of a query with every non default option:
```
Das example ist nicht für das query.

```sparql
prefix n1:     <...>
prefix n12:    <...>
prefix n123:   <...>
prefix n1234:  <...>
prefix n12345: <...>

select * 
where {
  ?var n1:p "ding" ;
       n12:p "foo" ;
       n123:p "bar" ;
       n1234:p "baz" ;
       n12345:p "out of filler" ;
}
```

Here is the full default format configuration:

```toml
[format]
align_predicates = true
align_prefixes = false
separate_prolouge = false
capitalize_keywords = true
insert_spaces = true
tab_size = 2
where_new_line = false
filter_same_line = true
```

#### Formatting comments

This algorithm fails when comments appear in the input string.  

> For example this query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following query
```

```sparql
SELECT ?a # comment
WHERE {
  ?a ?b ?c
}
```

> Is formatted to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is formatted to
```

```sparql
SELECT ?a # comment WHERE {
  ?a ?b ?c
}
```

> So let's fix this really quick, how hard can it be?  Right...?  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So let's fix this really quickly, how hard can it be?  Right...?  
```

---

**Step 1**: Parse, does not change.  
The only difference is that comments can appear anywhere in the syntax tree:

![](img/FormattingComments.svg)

**Step 1.5**: Extract comments  

> When collecting the edits just ignore the comment-nodes.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When collecting the edits, just ignore the comment-nodes.  
```

![](img/FormattingExtractComments.svg)

For each comment store:

- content
- indentation level
- is it a trailing comment or not
- the end position of the node it "attaches" to

The "attach" node is the first previous non-comment sibling or the parent.  

> (every comment has a parent)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Every comment has a parent.)
```

![](img/FormattingCommentAttach.svg)

Then do **Step 2**, **Step 3** and **Step 4** as before.  

> But dont remove redundant edits in **Step 4**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But don't remove redundant edits in **Step 4**.
```

{{< notice note >}}

> Since I compute a spearation edit between each node, I can savely assume that each comment got "deleted"  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since I compute a separation edit between each node, I can safely assume that each comment got "deleted"  
```
1. Nicht Speeration.
2. nicht "rettendlich"

> (exept if it is the first or last child of the root but lets ignore this edge case).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(except if it is the first or last child of the root but let's ignore this edge case).
```

{{< /notice >}}

> **Step 5**: Merge Comments  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 5**: Merge comments  
```

Merge the extracted comments into the sequence of edits.

{{< notice note >}}

Since edits got consolidated in **Step 4**, I can assume that the edits left in the sequence are non-consecutive.
{{< /notice >}}

> The location of the comments "anchor" is either at the start of a separation edit:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The location of the comment's "anchor" is either at the start of a separation edit:
```

![](img/FormattingInsertingCommentsCase1.svg)

Or contained in a merged edit:

![](img/FormattingInsertingCommentsCase2.svg)

In the second case, simply split the edit.  
This is safe, since it was merged in the first place.

> Then we edit the following textedit and remove leading whitespace, exept linebreaks.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, we edit the following textedit and remove the leading whitespace, except at linebreaks.  
```
oder?

Then there are 3 cases:

![](img/FormattingEditTheEdit.svg)

If the edit is just whitespace, then replace it with a "linebreak"-edit.  
If the first non-whitespace character is not a linebreak, insert a "linebreak"-edit.  

> If the first non-whitespace character is a linebreak, dont do anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the first non-whitespace character is a linebreak, don't do anything.
```
Dont soll nichts machen.

---

> Figuring this all out and implementing it properly took me about a week.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Figuring out this all and implementing it properly took me about a week.
```

#### Ideas for the future

- **Long lines**: should cause a line break

```sparql
SELECT ?v1 ?v3 ?v4 ?v5 ?v6 ?v7 ?v8 ?v9 ?v10
       ?v11 ?v12 ?v13 ?v14 ?v15 ?v16 ?v17
       ?v18 ?v19 ?v20 ?v21 ?v22 ?v23 ?v24
       ?v25 ?v26 ?v27 ?v28 ?v29 ?v30 ?v31
WHERE {}
```

> - **small nested queries**: should be compressed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Small nested queries**: should be compressed
```
Junge entscheid dich, groß oder klein

```sparql
SELECT ?castle WHERE {
    osmrel:51701 ogc:contains ?castle .
    { { ?castle osmkey:historic "castle" }
      UNION
      { ?castle osmkey:historic "tower" . ?castle osmkey:castle_type "defensive" } }
    UNION
    { ?castle osmkey:historic "archaeological_site" . ?castle osmkey:site_type "fortification" }
    ?castle osmkey:name ?name .
    ?castle osmkey:ruins ?ruins .
    OPTIONAL { ?castle osmkey:historic ?class }
    OPTIONAL { ?castle osmkey:archaeological_site ?class }
}
```

### Hover

When the client sends a `textDocument/hover` request, the server responds with information about a given position in a text-document.

> This is useful to give inexperienced users documentation about how some constructs work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful to give inexperienced users a documentation about how some constructs work:
```

- **Warning**: Potential problems; should be reviewed (e.g., deprecated functions, unused variables).
- **Info**: General insights; optional attention (e.g., code style improvements, documentation suggestions).
- **Hint**: Suggestions for enhancement (e.g., refactor opportunities, alternative approaches).

Diagnostics are either published by the server via a `textDocument/publishDiagnostics` notification,
or requested by the client via a `textDocument/diaglostic` request.

The diagnostics I implemented are:
- an error diagnostic for undeclared prefixes
- a warning diagnostic for unused prefixes
- an information diagnostic for uncompressed URI's

![](img/examples/diagnostics.png)

#### Ideas for the future

Highlight syntax errors:

![](img/examples/diagnostics-syntax.png)
This would require a more powerful parser that gives information about how the parse failed.

Highlight semantic errors, like selecting all variables in a `GROUP BY`:

![](img/examples/diagnostic-syntax.png)

Giving hints to make queries more concise:
![](img/examples/diagnostic-compress-triples.png)
![](img/examples/diagnostic-compress-obj.png)

### Code Actions

> The `textDocument/codeAction` request is send from the client to the server to request a set of commands for a given range in a textdocument. These commands can have arbitrary effect, but in most cases change the text-document through text-edits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `textDocument/codeAction` request is sent from the client to the server to request a set of commands for a given range in a textdocument. These commands can have arbitrary effects, but in most cases, they change the textdocument through textedits.
```

{{< notice note >}}

> The change of the text-document is always done by the client (editor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The change of the textdocument is always done by the client (editor).
```

> The server provides the text-edits but its up to the client to apply them since it "owns" the text-document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server provides the textedits, but its up to the client to apply them, since it "owns" the textdocument.
```

{{< /notice >}}

> Often, code-actions correspond to a diagnostic they resolve. Such code-actions are called "quickfix".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often, code actions correspond to a diagnostic they resolve. Such code actions are called "quickfix".
```

The exemplary code action I implemented is "Shorten URI".
The idea is to shorten a URI into its compact ["Curie"](https://www.w3.org/TR/2010/NOTE-curie-20101216/) form.

| Before code action                       | After code action                       |
| ---------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/code-action-before.png) | ![](img/examples/code-action-after.png) |

> This code-action is powered by [curies.rs](https://github.com/biopragmatics/curies.rs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code action is powered by [curies.rs](https://github.com/biopragmatics/curies.rs).
```

### Completion Suggestions
The key feature for a SPARQL language server is, in my opinion, code-completion.

> Here the editor provides suggestions to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the editor provides suggestions to the user.
```

> In SPARQL this is not just a convenience. Without smart completion suggestions a user has to know the ontology by heart. Its also a massive efficiency boost for experianced users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In SPARQL, this is not just a convenience. Without smart completion suggestions, a user has to know the ontology by heart. Its also a massive efficiency boost for experienced users.
```

Here is a possible structure for completions:

#### 1. Static

> The simplest kind of completions is just to provide static snippets of keywords or structures to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest kind of completion is just to provide static snippets of keywords or structures to the user.
```

> For this just the "Location" of the cursor is relevant, the context of the content of the knowledge-graph does not influence the suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, just the "location" of the cursor is relevant, the context of the content of the knowledge-graph does not influence the suggestions.
```

Here are a few examples i implemented:

|                                                |                                                |                                     |
| ---------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/cmp_select_pre.png)           | ![](img/examples/cmp_filter_pre.png)           | ![](img/examples/cmp_bind_pre.png)  |
| ![](img/examples/cmp_select_post.png)          | ![](img/examples/cmp_filter_post.png)          | ![](img/examples/cmp_bind_post.png) |

#### 2. Dynamic

> Dynamic completions are more complex. They use all information available to provide context based suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic completions are more complex. They use all information available to provide context-based suggestions.
```

> This again could be split into two categories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This again can be split into two categories:
```

#### 2.1. Offline

Here, the language server only uses "locally available" information:
That is: text in the editor and the data bundled with the language server (for example known prefixes).

> A simple example for this are suggestions of already defined variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simple example for these are suggestions of already defined variables:
```

  
![](img/examples/cmp_variable.png)

> This uses the parse-tree to find all variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This uses the parse tree to find all variables.
```

Currently, this is done very stupidly, as this also suggests variables when they are out of scope:

![](img/examples/cmp_variable_dumb.png)

#### 2.1. Online

> Here, the language Server uses data from a SPARQL-endpoint to provide completion suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the language server uses data from a SPARQL-endpoint to provide completion suggestions.
```

{{< notice warning >}}
This is not implemented yet!
{{< /notice >}}

Here is an example from the Qlever-OSM-endpoint: <htps://qlever.cs.uni-freiburg.de/api/osm-planet/>.

> [**O**pen**S**treet**M**ap](https://www.openstreetmap.org/) (OSM) is a Project that collects Geodata that is publicly accessible. Basically Google-maps, just without Google.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[**O**pen**S**treet**M**ap](https://www.openstreetmap.org/) (OSM) is a project that collects geodata that is publicly accessible. Basically Google-maps, just without Google.
```

This data can be represented in an RDF knowledge graph and queried using SPARQL.

> For example this query returns every bicycle parking spot in [Freiburg](https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/62768):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, this query returns every bicycle parking spot in [Freiburg](https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/62768):
```

```sparql
PREFIX geo: <http://www.opengis.net/ont/geosparql#>
PREFIX osmkey: <https://www.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:>
PREFIX ogc: <http://www.opengis.net/rdf#>
PREFIX osmrel: <https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/>
PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
SELECT ?bicycle_parking ?geometry WHERE {
  osmrel:62768 ogc:sfContains ?bicycle_parking .
  ?bicycle_parking osmkey:amenity "bicycle_parking" ;
                   geo:hasGeometry/geo:asWKT ?geometry .
}
```

> Now, I want to know the same thing just for Berlin.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, I want to know the same thing, just for Berlin.  
```

Unfortunately, I forgot that the relation ID of Berlin is `62422`...  
A good online-contextual-completion can help me:

|                            |                           |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/online-cmp-before.png) | ![](img/examples/online-cmp-after.png) |

# Using the language server

Ok, now let's talk about how to use the language server.
An editor needs to have a language server client and connect to our server.

I looked at three editors: neovim, vs-code, and a custom web-based-editor.

## Neovim

To get a language server running with neovim is very easy because it has a built-in language client and
neovim is built to be hacked.

### Installing the Program

> First, `Qlue-ls` needs to be available as executable binary on the system, neovim runs on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, `Qlue-ls` needs to be available as an executable binary on the system, neovim runs on.
```

You could just build the binary from source.
But to make it more convenient, I added the binary into two "repositories":

The Rust repository [crate.io](https://crates.io/crates/qlue-ls). To install from there, run:
```shell
cargo install qlue-ls
```
And the python repository [Pypi](https://pypi.org/project/qlue-ls/). To install from there, run:
```shell
pipx install qlue-ls
```
The python package is built with the help of [maturin](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin).

### Attaching

All you need is a `init.lua` file in your config directory with the following snippet:

```lua
vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd({ 'FileType' }, {
  desc = 'Connect to qlue-ls',
  pattern = { 'sparql' },
  callback = function()
    vim.lsp.start {
      name = 'qlue-ls',
      cmd = { 'qlue-ls', 'server' },
      root_dir = vim.fn.getcwd(),
      on_attach = function(client, bufnr)
        vim.keymap.set('n', '<leader>f', vim.lsp.buf.format, { buffer = bufnr, desc = 'LSP: ' .. '[F]ormat' })
      end,
    }
  end,
})
```

When you open a `sparql` file (a file with suffix `.rq`), this runs the command `qlue-ls server` and
connects the language client to this process.

> ## VS-code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## VS-Code
```

> In vs-code, there is no built-in language-client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In VS-Code, there is no built-in language-client.
```

Instead, you have to create a vs-code-extension that acts as a language-client.
I will do that in the future™.

## The Browser

Okay, now the cherry on top:
Let's connect this thing to a web-based editor (an editor that runs in a browser).
"But wait!" you might say, "Browser is JavaScript land!".

> And you would be right, until 2017.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And you would have been right, until 2017.
```

### WebAssembly

> [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/) is a open standard defined by the [World Wide Web Consortium](https://www.w3.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/) is an open standard defined by the [World Wide Web Consortium](https://www.w3.org/).
```

> It defines a Bytecode to run programs withing the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It defines a bytecode to run programs withing the browser.
```

All big browsers support it.

> If your program can be converted (compiled) to this WebAssembly(WASM) Bytecode, it can execute in the Browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your program can be converted (compiled) to this WebAssembly(WASM) bytecode, it can execute in the browser.
```

![](img/WebAssembly-data-flow-architecture.png)[^8]

> So now we need to build a compiler to convert Rust to WASM Bytecode...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, now, we need to build a compiler to convert Rust to WASM bytecode...
```

> Unfortunately, [some strangers on the Internet](https://github.com/rustwasm/team) already did that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, [some strangers on the internet](https://github.com/rustwasm/team) already did that.
```

The project is called [wasm-pack](https://rustwasm.github.io/wasm-pack/).

It's very organic and simple, you just annotate the method or struct you want to "export" to WASM.

```rust
#[wasm_bindgen]
pub fn init_language_server(writer: web_sys::WritableStreamDefaultWriter) -> Server {
    wasm_logger::init(wasm_logger::Config::default());
    Server::new(move |message| send_message(&writer, message))
}
```

Then wasm-pack builds WASM-bytecode and JavaScript "glue code".

> This glue code does a lot off stuff to bridge the gap between JavaScript and WASM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This glue code does a lot of stuff to bridge the gap between JavaScript and WASM.
```

```javascript
...
export function init_language_server(writer) {
    const ret = wasm.init_language_server(writer);
    return Server.__wrap(ret);
}
...
```

To actually run this in the browser, I needed to jump through a couple more hoops but I spare you the details.
I packaged the result and uploaded it to [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/qlue-ls): a JavaScript repository.
Now we can install the package using npm and access it from a JavaScript file:

```bash
npm install qlue-ls
```

```javascript
import { init_language_server } from "qlue-ls";
const server = init_language_server(...);
server.listen(...);
```

#### Tree-Sitter in WebAssembly

> As stated earlier, tree-sitter creates a parser in c and I wrote my program in Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As stated earlier, tree-sitter creates a parser in C and I wrote my program in Rust.
```

> Turns our compiling a Rust program that calls external C functions to WebAssembly creates something

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It turns out compiling a Rust program that calls external C functions to WebAssembly creates something
```

called "**ABI-Incompatibilities**".
I wish I could tell you how I solved that, but to be honest, I don't want to talk about this experience, since it was extremely painful.

In short, I found a [project](https://github.com/shadaj/tree-sitter-c2rust) that ports the C code to Rust and all my issues disappeared.
This is the second reason for me to move away from tree-sitter.

### The Editor

Next, we need a web-based editor.
There are a couple options. Here are a few:

- [Monaco-Editor](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/)
- [CodeMirror](https://codemirror.net/)
- [ACE Editor](https://ace.c9.io/)

None of them have built-in language clients, but all of them have extensions that provides one.

- Monaco-Editor: [monaco-languageclient](https://github.com/TypeFox/monaco-languageclient)
- CodeMirror: [@shopify/codemirror-language-client](https://github.com/shopify/theme-tools), [codemirror-languageserver](https://github.com/FurqanSoftware/codemirror-languageserver), [codemirror-languageservice](https://github.com/remcohaszing/codemirror-languageservice)
- ACE Editor: [ace-linters](https://github.com/mkslanc/ace-linters)

> But to be fair, the ones for CodeMirror don't really look stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, to be fair, the ones for CodeMirror don't really look stable.
```

I decided to go with Monaco for a couple reasons:

- It's very mature (It's the same editor that drives vs-code)
- The language-client extension looks very active.
- I hope to get a synergy effect since both LSP and Monaco are from Microsoft

I will eventually also try ACE.

To get Monaco running with the language client, I had to jump through a few hoops again (actually a lot),
but I again spare you with the details.

### TextMate

A good editor needs syntax highlighting. (The thing that makes the colors.)

| without syntax highlighting              | with syntax highlighting              |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/highlighting_off.png)   | ![](img/examples/highlighting_on.png) |

> For Monaco-Editor there are 2 options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Monaco-Editor, there are 2 options:
```

> - [Monarch](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/monarch.html): build specifically for Monaco, well suited for simple languages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Monarch](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/monarch.html): built specifically for Monaco, well suited for simple languages
```
du hattest es doch so brav angemerkt

> - [TextMate Grammar](https://macromates.com/manual/en/language_grammars): feature of the [TextMate](https://macromates.com/) Editor, widely used standard in text editors 

Reviewer: überleg dir mal, ob du "widely used in standard text editors" oder "widely usd as a standard in text editors" schreiben willst

I went with TextMate Grammar.
It's more complex but also more powerful and can be used with other editors.

TextMate Grammars use the [Oniguruma](https://github.com/kkos/oniguruma) regex engine.

> Basically you use write patters that identify the tokens you want to highlight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Basically, you use writing patters that identify the tokens you want to highlight.
```

Here is a simple example:

```json
 {
	"scopeName": "source.sparql",
	"fileTypes": ["sparql"],
	"foldingStartMarker": "\\{\\s*$",
	"foldingStopMarker": "^\\s*\\}",
	"patterns": [
		{
			"name": "keyword.control.sparql",
			"match": "\\b(SELECT|WHERE|FILTER|)\\b"
		},
		{
			"name": "string.quoted.double.sparql",
			"begin": "\"",
			"end": "\"",
			"patterns": [
				{
					"name": "constant.character.escape.sparql",
					"match": "\\\\."
				}
			]
		}
	]
}
```

### Plugging everything together

> Now this actually falls under "hoops I needed to jump through".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, this actually falls under "hoops I needed to jump through".
```

> But I think its quite esthetic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But I think its quite aesthetic.
```
geht beides, find ich so aber hübscher

> Here are the Pieces we have so far:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the pieces we have so far:
```

The DOM-Element, the Monoco-Editor-Worker, the TextMate-Worker, the Language-Server.

> With Worker i mean [Web Worker](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Worker). Web-Worker's allow JavaScript code to be executed separated from the main-thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Worker, I mean [Web Worker](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Worker). Web-Workers allow JavaScript code to be executed separately from the main-thread.
```

> All that's left is a Worker that forwards the Language-server WASM component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All that's left is a Worker that forwards the language-server WASM component.
```

Here is the architecture:

![](img/setup.png)

# How does Qlue-ls compare against other software?

> Now we have a language server we can use in various Editors that has limited capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we have a language-server we can use in various editors that have limited capabilities.
```
Bindestrich oder kein Bindestrich, das ist hier die Frage.

How does this compare against other software that's out there?

Here is what I found:

> | Tool                                                                                | Description                                                                                                               | Platform     | Mainainer                                                             | FOSS          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Tool                                                                                | Description                                                                                                               | Platform     | Maintainer                                                             | FOSS          |
```

| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- |

> | [sparql-langauge-server](https://github.com/stardog-union/stardog-language-servers) | SPARQL language server build in TypeScript                                                                                | web & native | [Stardog](https://www.stardog.com/)                                   | ✅  Apache-2.0 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [sparql-langauge-server](https://github.com/stardog-union/stardog-language-servers) | SPARQL language-server build in TypeScript                                                                                | web & native | [Stardog](https://www.stardog.com/)                                   | ✅  Apache-2.0 |
```
Hamlet

> | [RDF and SPARQL plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/13838-rdf-and-sparql)  | A RDF and SPARQL Plugin for JetBrains IDEs                                                                                | native       | [Sharedvocabs Ltd](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/vendor/sharedvocabs) | ❌ 5€/month    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [RDF and SPARQL plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/13838-rdf-and-sparql)  | A RDF and SPARQL plugin for JetBrains IDEs                                                                                | native       | [Sharedvocabs Ltd](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/vendor/sharedvocabs) | ❌ 5€/month    |
```

| [Qlever-UI](https://github.com/ad-freiburg/qlever-ui)                               | A custom [codemirror](https://codemirror.net/) editor for the [Qlever](https://github.com/ad-freiburg/QLever) triplestore | web          | [ad-freiburg](https://ad.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/)                 | ✅  Apache-2.0 |
| [YASGUI](https://github.com/TriplyDB/Yasgui)                                        | A lightweight, web-based SPARQL editor                                                                                    | web          | [Triply](https://triply.cc/en-US)                                     | ✅  MIT        |

> | [sparql-formatter](https://github.com/sparqling/sparql-formatter/tree/main)         | A SPARQL formatter build in JavaScript                                                                                    | web          | [SPARQLing](https://github.com/sparqling)                             | ?             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [sparql-formatter](https://github.com/sparqling/sparql-formatter/tree/main)         | A SPARQL formatter built in JavaScript                                                                                    | web          | [SPARQLing](https://github.com/sparqling)                             | ?             |
```
Actually sind es zwei verschiedene Bedeutungen. Wenn du build verwendest, geht es um den build. Wenn du built verwendest, geht es darum, auf die Sprache Javascript hinzuweisen.

> Let's look at how these tools compare in the aspects discussed in this article. (**personal opinion**)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at these tools' comparison concerning the aspects discussed in this article. (**personal opinion**)
```

| ---------------------------- | ------- | ------------------- | ---------------- | ---------------------- | ------ |
| Formatting                   | ⭐⭐⭐     | ❌                   | ⭐⭐⭐              | ⭐⭐⭐<br>(using Qlue-ls) | ⭐⭐     |
| Hover (Offline)              | ⭐       | ⭐                   | ⭐⭐               | ❌                      | ❌      |
| Hover (Online)               | ❌       | ❌                   | ❌                | ⭐⭐                     | ❌      |
| Diagnostics                  | ⭐⭐      | ⭐                   | ⭐⭐               | ❌                      | ⭐      |
| Code-actions                 | ⭐⭐      | ❌                   | ⭐⭐               | ❌                      | ❌      |
| Completion - offline-static  | ⭐⭐      | ⭐                   | ⭐⭐⭐              | ⭐⭐                     | ❌      |
| Completion - offline-dynamic | ⭐       | ⭐                   | ⭐                | ⭐⭐                     | ⭐      |
| Completion - online-dynamic  | ❌       | ❌                   | ❌                | ⭐⭐                     | ⭐      |

| Symbol | Meaning         |
| ------ | --------------- |
| ⭐⭐⭐    | nearly perfect  |
| ⭐⭐     | could be better |

> | ⭐      | bearly working  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| ⭐      | barely working  |
```
bearly ist (er)bär(m)lich

Reviewer: schorry

| ❌      | not implemented |

{{< notice warning >}}

> These observations came from a brief inspection. It's possible they are better than I think they are!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These observations came from a brief inspection. It's possible that they are better than I think they are!
```

> For example `YASGUI` also supports custom queries for completion. I did not have the time to test this properly!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, `YASGUI` also supports custom queries for completion. I did not have the time to test this properly!
```

I know that `Qlever-UI` also uses custom queries, so the distinction between the two may be unfair.
{{< /notice >}}

## Qlue-ls vs sparql-formatter

Since [sparql-formatter](https://github.com/sparqling/sparql-formatter/tree/main) is "just" a formatter, it's not really fair to compare it like the other tools.
So let's do a direct comparison:

> I build a scraper that collected all 381 example queries from the [Wikidata Query Service](https://query.wikidata.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I built a scraper that collected all 381 example queries from the [Wikidata Query Service](https://query.wikidata.org/).
```

Then I formatted the query with `Qlue-ls` and `sparql-formatter` and compared the two results using diff.
Here are the differences:

### Core differences

#### Error resilience

`sparql-formatter` expects correct queries, while `Qlue-ls` also works with incomplete queries.
The quality of the result depends on how the parser handles the error.
#### Concrete vs Abstract

> Then the two function slightly different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then the two functions slightly differ.
```

`Qlue-ls` uses a Concrete Syntax Tree (*CST*) and `sparql-formatter` uses an Abstract Syntax Tree (*AST*).

While a *CST* represent the **complete** syntactic structure of the input (including parentheses, punctuation ...),
an *AST* is an abstracted representation. It omits syntactic details and only keeps the essential elements.

> For example: an input like `(22 * (3 - 1) - 2)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example: for an input like `(22 * (3 - 1) - 2)`
```
denk ich mal

> The trees would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the trees would be:
```

| CST          | AST          |
| ------------ | ------------ |
| ![](img/cst.png) | ![](img/ast.png) |

> While you can use both for formatting, a *CST* guaranties that no token gets lost or is added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While you can use both for formatting, a *CST* guarantees that no token gets lost or is added.
```

> For example `sparql-formatter` adds a "." here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, `sparql-formatter` adds a "." here:
```

| before                     | after                     |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/format_ast_before.png) | ![](img/examples/format_ast_after.png) |

### Errors

> Let's look at critical errors the formatters do (or don't do)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at critical errors the formatters do (or don't do)
```
entweder "the critical errors" oder "some critical ...". suchs dir aus

#### Errors in sparql-formatter

#### Strange Brackets in Expression lists

`sparql-formatter` throws an error for this query:
![](img/examples/format-sq-error1.png)
```
SyntaxError at line:5(col:11-12)
Expected: != && * + - / < <= = > >= IN NOT ||
--
          )

```
The brackets are strange but no reason to throw an error.

#### Encapsulated Aggregate
`sparql-formatter` throws an error for encapsulated aggregates:

![](img/examples/format_error_3.png)

```
file:///usr/lib/node_modules/sparql-formatter/src/formatter.js:811
  if (variable.varType === '$') {
               ^

TypeError: Cannot read properties of undefined (reading 'varType')
```
#### Errors in Qlue-ls formatter

None I know of.

> ### Opinion based differences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Opinion-based differences
```

#### Where-Clause newline

| Qlue-ls                   | sparql-formatter          |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/format_diff_1_ql.png) | ![](img/examples/format_diff_1_sf.png) |

#### Union-Clause newline

| Qlue-ls                   | sparql-formatter          |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/format_diff_2_ql.png) | ![](img/examples/format_diff_2_sf.png) |

#### Capitalize Keywords

`sparql-formatter` capitalizes some, but not all keywords.
`Qlue-ls` capitalizes all.

| Qlue-ls                   | sparql-formatter          |
| ------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/format_diff_3_ql.png) | ![](img/examples/format_diff_3_sf.png) |

#### Line length based line breaks

sparql-formatter will add a linebreak if the line get to long.

| Qlue-ls                    | sparql-formatter          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| ![](img/examples/format_error_3_ql.png) | ![](img/examples/format_diff_4_sf.png) |
### Summary

> `sparql-formatter` has line length based line breaks, but has a few runtime errors, adds tokens (non-breaking) and has inconsistent capitalization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`sparql-formatter` has line-length-based line breaks, but has a few runtime errors, adds tokens (non-breaking) and has inconsistent capitalization.
```
funny zungenbrecher

> `Qlue-ls` is error resilient and has no known runtime errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Qlue-ls` is error-resilient and has no known runtime errors.
```

> Overall the two create surprisingly similar outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, the two create surprisingly similar outputs.
```

> I opened up an issue for the bugs I found so maybe in the future we will produce the same output (aside the `CST`/`AST` stuff).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I opened up an issue for the bugs I found, so maybe, in the future, we will produce the same output (beside the `CST`/`AST` stuff).
```
Sind wsl 19. Jhdt Kommas, aber ich mag sie.

I also wanted to do a performance comparison.
But creating arbitrarily long random SPARQL queries is a side quest I don't have the time for.

# Future work

> `Qlue-ls` is right now (07-01-2025) still in the alpha phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Qlue-ls` is still in the alpha phase right now (07-01-2025).
```
Eine Eselbrücke wäre "P(lace) before T(ime) = Pee before tea".

It was my first Rust project and first contact with linked-data.
I'm proud of my work, but I'm sure there is a lot to improve!

> Aside the code quality, efficiency, and so on, here is the roadmap for this project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside the code quality, efficiency and so on - here is the roadmap for this project.
```
Aside = beiseite
passt hier, aber merks dir. Oben wars glaube mal bissl ungeeignet.

## Stronger Parser

> As stated earlier Tree-Sitter was nice to get going fast, but it's not the right solution for this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As stated earlier, tree-sitter was nice to get going fast, but it's not the right solution for this problem.
```
Ich bin mir ziemlich sicher, dass eine "global replace" Funktion mir einiges an Arbeit erspart hätte

> I need a Parser that **deterministically** gives me the exact "location" within the parse tree for any position in the editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I need a parser that **deterministically** gives me the exact "location" within the parse-tree for any position in the editor.
```

> This could be achieved with a resilient "LL(1)" parser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This could be achieved with a resilient "LL(1)"-parser.
```

> There is a [article](https://matklad.github.io/2023/05/21/resilient-ll-parsing-tutorial.html) by [Alex Kladov](https://github.com/matklad), the creator of [rust-analyzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer) (**the** rust language server) that goes into detail on this topic. This will be the topic of my Bachelor Thesis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is an [article](https://matklad.github.io/2023/05/21/resilient-ll-parsing-tutorial.html) by [Alex Kladov](https://github.com/matklad), the creator of [rust-analyzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer) (**the** rust language server) that goes into detail regarding this topic. This will be the topic of my Bachelor Thesis.
```

## Query Sparql endpoint

Currently, `Qlue-ls` it not firing any queries against a SPARQL-endpoint.

> This will open a new world of cool Features and make this Language server actually useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will open a new world of cool features and make this language server actually useful.
```

There are three reasons I did not implement this yet:

> 1. I think this will open a box of cool new Problems I don't have the Time to solve (and i don't want to do it for free)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. I think this will open a box of cool new problems I don't have the time to solve (and I don't want to do it for free).
```

> 2. I currently ship to WASM **and** x86 targets, this makes this a bit more complex

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. I currently ship to WASM **and** x86 targets, which makes this a bit more complex.
```

> 3. This opens the box of **async** and I heard that is another level of complexity in Rust

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. This opens the box of **async** and I heard that that is another level of complexity in Rust.
```

## Enhance existing features

Formatting should try to maintain a maximal line length.
It could also try to keep things more concise.

> Diagnostics and code-actions can be extended majorly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diagnostics and code-actions can be extended majorly.
```
Sag mir was du sagen willst und ich formuliers dir um.

> I did not implement this since its mostly repetitive extra work that does not bring any new insights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I did not implement this since it's mostly repetitive extra work that does not bring any new insights.
```
its = sein
it's = es ist

Also, since all existing features depend on the parse-tree, I want to build a stronger parser first!
# Acknowledgements

- [TJ DeVries](https://github.com/sponsors/tjdevries) for awesome LSP tutorials:
	- [Building a Language-Server from scratch](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YsdlcQoHqPY)
	- [LSP in neovim](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bTWWFQZqzyI)
- [Gordian Dziwis](https://github.com/GordianDziwis/tree-sitter-sparql) for doing the heavy lifting
- [guyutongxue](https://github.com/Guyutongxue/clangd-in-browser) for showing how to run clangd in the browser

[^1]: https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/
[^2]: https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/overviews/lsp/overview/
[^3]: https://www.zeit.de/video/2024-11/6364737354112/neuseeland-abgeordnete-protestieren-mit-haka-tanz-im-neuseelaendischen-parlament
[^4]: notifications are messages without a `id`, since they do not expect a response.

> [^5]: In rust packages are called crates (you know... because cargo ships crates...)

Reviewer: mach bitte nen satz draus
